# Quarterly Essay: The White Queen
## David Marr

- One Nation is a racist party despite recent political and media reluctance to say this outright.
- Previous truce that neither major party would exploit racism or racist-leaning voters; enabled dismantling of the White Australia Policy without caving to backlash. But Howard was eager to "hunt for small pockets of votes out on the fringe", in keeping with his maxim that "Politics is relentlessly driven by the laws of arithmetic".
- One Nation votes are commonly Australian ethnicity and working class. They are not necessarily old, rural, religious, poor or male. They are united by affection for Pauline Hanson, deep disenchantment with politics, literal nostalgia for an earlier Australia, hostility to immigration, and racism.
- "One Nation voters in 2016 were absolutely Australian: the Aussie children of Aussie parents. They identify as proudly working class. They aren't dying out: roughly a third ... were under forty-five. Despite its reputation as a bush party, half One Nation's strength lies in big cities. Almost all Hanson's voters left school early but went on to make a good fist of their lives. ... Her followers aren't poor or unemployed. One Nation was very much a man's party in the early days but now many more women are backing Hanson. There's not a whiff of faith-based moralising about One Nation."
- Mapping Social Cohesion surveys show majority of Australians are receptive to immigration and want to live in an open, orderly, optimistic and tolerant society:
-- 85% report the past year was happy, 75% are satisfied with their financial situation, 80% believe Australia provides economic opportunity where hard work brings a better life.
-- 91% have a great or moderate sense of belonging in Australia. This is down somewhat from 2007, when it was 96%.
-- 2016 survey had lowest level of concern about migrant numbers since surveys began; 70% think current level of migration should be sustained or increased. Gallup polls show Australia much more open than other countries - e.g. in UK, 70% want migration numbers cut. But at same time, majority are hostile to arrivals by boat; 60% disapproved and at least 30% (perhaps as much as 60%) think boats should be turned back.
-- 85% of people think multiculturalism is a good thing, and don't ask for simple assimilation. But they are looking for integration with core values. In a different survey, only 49% thought that essentially multicultural characteristics made Australia a better place to live - although this was still higher than UK and European responses.
- "The core level of intolerance in Australia is close to 10% of the population"; with about 25-30% having some intolerance or rejection of cultural diversity. In recent years, survey is seeing more strong negative responses (the 10%), increasing negativity towards Muslims (14% very negative, 10% somewhat negative), and more people reporting experiences of discrimination (39% of Indian and Chinese, 77% of South Sudanese).
-- 87% of One Nation voters are hostile to Muslims settling in Australia. More generally, of the 25% of people negative towards Islam: they are older (half over 65), less educated (hostility is twice as common among school non-finishers than among university graduates), similarly socially liberal on other matters like euthanasia and medical marijuana, and generally more hostile to government (combined primary vote for Labor and Coalition is only 50%, with 38% going to independents). Obviously also correlated with hostility towards immigration, multiculturalism, and boat arrivals.
-- In last census (not most recent), Asians were 8% of population and Muslims 2%.
- Creation of political language, partly via importation from US, has shaped debate: political correctness, elites, culture war, free speech, mainstream, etc. Claimed silencing of silent majority viewpoints, including by Racial Discrimination Act, even though there is patently plenty of expression of these viewpoints in the media.
- About 50% of people never change their vote through all the elections they vote in. The figure used to be even higher at 70%. Australia has usually had high levels of satisfaction in democracy and government, but this has been sliding since 2010. Party breakdown of those who believe politicians "usually look after themselves": National 39%, Liberal 40%, Labor 51%, Green 51%, One Nation 85%.
- One Nation voters in cities tend to live in suburbs adjoining migrant-heavy areas, but not actually in them. (Perhaps just because in the migrant-heavy areas, the migrants wouldn't vote for One Nation.) Experience of welfare and immigration tends to be second or third-hand, not personal.
- "Education is the clearest link between Hanson, Trump and Brexit. Surveys [in all three countries] point to education as a key component of political dissatisfaction." One Nation attitude of "I can work this all out by myself".
- One Nation voters have not been 'ruined by globalisation'. They are working and prosperous, not on welfare. However they are gloomy about their own household situation (two-thirds say worse than a year ago, compared to a quarter of Nationals or Greens) and the national economy (three-quarters say worse than a year ago, compared to mid-forties for all major parties).
- Rebecca Huntley: "Simply addressing economic inequality, which is what the left has tried to do, is just not sufficient. Prosperity is important, but what worries this group is the cultural, social slippage they feel in their life. They imagine their fathers' and grandfathers' lives were better, more certain, easier to navigate. Maybe they were and maybe they weren't, but it's the loss of that that is worrying for them."
- "Intense nexus between law and order and immigration" - tend to have hardline stances on law and order, and ties into feeling of social change that makes communities less safe, trustworthy, familiar, monocultural.
- One Nation voters are leaving Coalition and Labor in roughly equal numbers (40% each), with only 5% Greens and balance from others like Palmer or independents. Major parties feel they can only address the economic insecurity part of the argument rather than calling out racism. Kosmos Samaras (Labor): "We can only address this through dealing with their economic insecurities. If you say to someone, 'Vote for us because that woman is racist,' we'd be classified as elites. We'll get killed electorally. If all we do is try to address the cultural issues, we'll lose."
- Anne Aly breaks down One Nation voters into two categories: disaffected voters who think she says things others won't say and holds politics/governments to account (and who are therefore disenchanted when she does preference deals with Liberals, etc); and hardcore anti-immigration/anti-Muslim voters who don't care about anything else, and will tolerate any candidate.
- Rate of One Nation voters visiting official website during 2016 campaign is 34% - Greens 40%, Coalition only 13%.
===
Correspondence
- Lachlan Harris: In 2016 election, 3.1M cast lower-house primary vote for a minor party of independent. Only 175K were for One Nation across 15 seats; NXT won 230K in 18 seats; 380K for independents. Over the last 30 years, "the shift away from the major parties always survives the implosions to which all minor parties are subject, especially One Nation". Must avoid "conflating the limited [race-based] political potential of One Nation with the much more durable, and in some ways more ominous, broader appeal of minor parties".
- John Daley: In the 2016 election, minor parties (excl. Greens) gained 26% of first preference votes in Senate, up from 11% in 2004. 4% of that was One Nation. Although there are many One Nation voters in cities, vote share does appear correlated with regionality. Regions are often particularly unhappy with government.
- Philip Dorling: "The prospect of One Nation securing the balance of power in the federal Senate on a long-term basis should be taken quite seriously."